Add discounts page (#671)
saleor/saleor-docs: docs/developer/discounts.mdx

---
title: Discounts
sidebar_label: Discounts
---

## Introduction

> There are two kinds of discounts in Saleor: `Sales` and `Vouchers`.
> Discounts allow for the reduction of prices for selected variants, products, collections,
> or categories by a given percentage or fixed value.
> The sale discount is automatically applied to all included products, without requiring
> any additional actions from the user. In contrast, vouchers require the user to provide
> a code during the checkout process. Both the sale and voucher discounts can be used together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Discounts allow for the reduction of prices for selected variants, products, collections,
or categories by a given percentage or a fixed value.
There are two kinds of discounts in Saleor: `Sales` and `Vouchers`.
The **sale** discount is automatically applied to all included products, without requiring
any additional actions from the user. In contrast, **vouchers** require the user to provide
a code during the checkout process. Both the sale and voucher discounts can be used together.
```

>all included products
We are missing where these products are included.

### Sale

> As mentioned earlier, sales are automatically applied when a product is added to the checkout.
> For instance, if a product is priced at **$9** and has a **10%** discount, it will be available for **$8.1**.
> The discount will be visible on the line prices. To calculate the total applied discount,
> subtract the `line.undiscountedTotalPrice` from the `line.totalPrice`.
> To calculate the discount on one unit, subtract the `line.undiscountedUnitPrice` from the `line.unitPrice`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sales are automatically applied when a product is added to the checkout.
For instance, if a product is priced at **$9** and has a **10%** discount, it will be available for **$8.1**.
The discount will be visible on the line prices. To calculate the total applied discount,
subtract the `line.undiscountedTotalPrice` from the `line.totalPrice`.
To calculate the discount on one unit, subtract the `line.undiscountedUnitPrice` from the `line.unitPrice`.
```

:::info
The sale discount is not visible on `checkout.discount.amount`.
:::

> Consider the following example: after adding a product on sale to the checkout,
> the response will include the discounted price of the product.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below, we add an on-sale product to the checkout. The response of the `checkoutLinesAdd` mutation will include the discounted product price.
```

```graphql
mutation {
  checkoutLinesAdd(
    checkoutId: "Q2hlY2tvdXQ6NzMwMzkwMmItZGRhOC00MzU3LTk1YTAtNjRiODNiNTllMmUy"
    lines: { quantity: 1, variantId: "UHJvZHVjdFZhcmlhbnQ6Mzcx" }
  ) {
    errors {
      message
    }
    checkout {
      discount {
        amount
      }
      token
      lines {
        quantity
        variant {
          name
        }
        totalPrice {
          gross {
            amount
          }
          net {
            amount
          }
        }
        undiscountedTotalPrice {
          amount
        }
        unitPrice {
          gross {
            amount
          }
          net {
            amount
          }
        }
        undiscountedUnitPrice {
          amount
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> Please check the line prices in the following response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note the line prices in the following response.
```

> The line.totalPrice is **8.1**, and the `line.undiscountedTotalPrice` is **9.0**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `line.totalPrice` is **8.1**, and the `line.undiscountedTotalPrice` is **9.0**.
```

    "checkoutLinesAdd": {
      "errors": [],
      "checkout": {
        "discount": {
          "amount": 0.0
        },
        "token": "7303902b-dda8-4357-95a0-64b83b59e2e2",
        "lines": [
          {
            "quantity": 1,
            "variant": {
              "name": "UHJvZHVjdFZhcmlhbnQ6Mzcx"
            },
            "totalPrice": {
              "gross": {
                "amount": 8.1
              },
              "net": {
                "amount": 8.1
              }
            },
            "undiscountedTotalPrice": {
              "amount": 9.0
            },
            "unitPrice": {
              "gross": {
                "amount": 8.1
              },
              "net": {
                "amount": 8.1
              }
            },
            "undiscountedUnitPrice": {
              "amount": 9.0
            }
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Voucher

There are three types of vouchers:

- Fixed amount: reduces the price by a specified value.
- Percentage: reduces the price by a specified percentage value.
- Shipping: reduces the shipping price.

The voucher can be applied to all checkout products, or only to specified ones.

> There is also an option to apply the discount only to the cheapest eligible product.

Reviewer: ```
There is also an option to apply the discount only to the cheapest eligible product.
```

What does "eligible" mean here?

Author: I mean the product that is included in the voucher. But maybe it's not needed here?

              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 3.59
              }
            },
            "undiscountedUnitPrice": {
              "amount": 4.0
            }
          },
          {
            "quantity": 1,
            "totalPrice": {
              "net": {
                "amount": 40.41
              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 40.41
              }
            },
            "undiscountedTotalPrice": {
              "amount": 45.0
            },
            "unitPrice": {
              "net": {
                "amount": 40.41
              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 40.41
              }
            },
            "undiscountedUnitPrice": {
              "amount": 45.0
            }
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The discount is visible on both the `checkout.discount` field and the prices in `checkout.lines`.
In the first line, the `totalPrice` is **$0.41** less than the `undiscountedTotalPrice`,
while the difference in the second line is **$4.59**.
The `checkout.discount` is the sum of the differences between `totalPrice` and `undiscountedTotalPrice` of the lines.

:::info

> If an entire order voucher with a fixed amount is applied during checkout,
> and the order contains multiple lines, the discount will be distributed evenly in proportion to the total price of each line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the user applied a fixed-amount order voucher during checkout, and the order contains multiple lines, the discount will be distributed evenly in proportion to the total price of each line.
```

:::

> #### Applying the entire order voucher that is applied once per order

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Applying the entire order voucher once per order
```

Not sure if my suggestion is valid, but we should try to rephrase that.

> If a voucher with the `applyOncePerOrder` flag set to True is used in a similar scenario,
> the discount will only apply to the cheapest eligible product. In this checkout,
> the cheapest eligible product is priced at **$4**.
> Therefore, the discount amount will also be $4 and will only appear on one line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a voucher with the `applyOncePerOrder` flag set to `True` is used in a similar scenario,
the discount will only apply to the cheapest eligible product. In this checkout,
the cheapest eligible product is priced at **$4**.
Therefore, the discount will be $4 and will only appear on one line.
```

> Refer to the response from running the same mutation as before.
> The `checkout.discount` is **4.0**. The cheapest line's totalPrice is **0.0**,
> and the undiscountedTotalPrice is **4.0**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the response from running the same mutation as before.
The `checkout.discount` is **4.0**. The cheapest line's `totalPrice` is **0.0**,
and the `undiscountedTotalPrice` is **4.0**.
```

            },
            "unitPrice": {
              "net": {
                "amount": 18.0
              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 18.0
              }
            },
            "undiscountedUnitPrice": {
              "amount": 20.0
            }
          },
          {
            "quantity": 1,
            "totalPrice": {
              "net": {
                "amount": 1.99
              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 1.99
              }
            },
            "undiscountedTotalPrice": {
              "amount": 1.99
            },
            "unitPrice": {
              "net": {
                "amount": 1.99
              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 1.99
              }
            },
            "undiscountedUnitPrice": {
              "amount": 1.99
            }
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

As we can see, the 10% discount has been applied to the first two lines.
The total discount amount is visible in the `checkout.discount` field, which is equal to
the sum of the differences between the `undiscountedTotalPrice` and `totalPrice` of all lines.

> #### Applying the specific product voucher that applies once per order

Reviewer: same as above, too much "applying"

> If the voucher has the `applyOncePerOrder` flag turned on, the discount will only be applied to
> the single cheapest product that is eligible for the discount. In the scenario described,
> the discount would only be applied to the product with a price of **$20**, and would be visible on only one line of the order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the voucher has the `applyOncePerOrder` flag set to `True`, the discount will only be applied to
the single cheapest product eligible for the discount. In the scenario described,
the discount would only be applied to the product with a price of **$20**, and would be visible on only one line of the order.
```

            "quantity": 1,
            "totalPrice": {
              "net": {
                "amount": 18.0
              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 18.0
              }
            },
            "undiscountedTotalPrice": {
              "amount": 20.0
            },
            "unitPrice": {
              "net": {
                "amount": 18.0
              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 18.0
              }
            },
            "undiscountedUnitPrice": {
              "amount": 20.0
            }
          },
          {
            "quantity": 1,
            "totalPrice": {
              "net": {
                "amount": 1.99
              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 1.99
              }
            },
            "undiscountedTotalPrice": {
              "amount": 1.99
            },
            "unitPrice": {
              "net": {
                "amount": 1.99
              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 1.99
              }
            },
            "undiscountedUnitPrice": {
              "amount": 1.99
            }
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> Here, we can see that the discount was only applied to the cheapest line included in the voucher discount.
> The total `checkout.discount` is only **$2.0** in this case. The difference between
> `totalPrice` and `undiscountedTotalPrice` is only visible on the second line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we can see that the discount was only applied to the cheapest line included in the voucher discount.
The total `checkout.discount` is **$2.0** in this case. The difference between
`totalPrice` and `undiscountedTotalPrice` is only visible on the second line.
```

### Sale and Voucher together

Sales and vouchers can be combined. In this case, the voucher discount is applied to the price after the sale.
Let's consider an example: the checkout has two items, and the second item is on sale.

> A fixed amount discount of $5 is being applied to the entire order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A fixed discount of **$5** is being applied to the entire order.
```

            "totalPrice": {
              "net": {
                "amount": 18.06
              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 18.06
              }
            },
            "undiscountedTotalPrice": {
              "amount": 20.0
            },
            "unitPrice": {
              "net": {
                "amount": 18.06
              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 18.06
              }
            },
            "undiscountedUnitPrice": {
              "amount": 20.0
            }
          },
          {
            "quantity": 1,
            "totalPrice": {
              "net": {
                "amount": 28.44
              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 28.44
              }
            },
            "undiscountedTotalPrice": {
              "amount": 35.0
            },
            "unitPrice": {
              "net": {
                "amount": 28.44
              },
              "gross": {
                "amount": 28.44
              }
            },
            "undiscountedUnitPrice": {
              "amount": 35.0
            }
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
```

> As we can see, the total discount is **$5.0**. For the first line,
> the entire difference between `totalPrice` and `undiscountedTotalPrice` comes from
> the voucher discount ($1.94). However, in the case of the second line, the difference
> between those values ($6.56) is the total discount applied to this line,
> which includes both sales and voucher discounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we can see, the total discount is **$5.0**. In the first line,
the entire difference between `totalPrice` and `undiscountedTotalPrice` comes from
the voucher discount ($1.94). However, in the second line, the difference
between those values ($6.56) is the total discount applied to this line,
which includes both sales and voucher discounts.
```

> To calculate the value of the sale that was applied, we can sum up the line discounts and subtract

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To calculate the value of the applied sale, we can sum up the line discounts and subtract
```

`checkout.discount`. In this example, the calculation would be: **($1.94 + $6.56) - $5.00 = $3.5**.

> Therefore, we end up with the same value as calculated previously from the response, before the voucher was applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, we end up with the same value as before applying the voucher.
```
